#summary Place to add information about publications utilizing S.A.G.E.


Users of S.A.G.E. Software are requested to post bibliographic information about every paper in which S.A.G.E. is used (author(s), title, journal, volume and page numbers) here.


The recommended way of referencing the current release of the S.A.G.E. programs is as follows:

*{{{S.A.G.E. 6.3 [2012]. Statistical Analysis for Genetic Epidemiology http://darwin.cwru.edu/sage/. }}}*

<br>
<br>
==YEAR 2012==

 * Grigoroiu-Serbanescu, M, Wickramaratne, P, Mihailescu, R, Prelipceanu, D, Sima, D, Codreanu, M, Grimbert, M, Elston, RC (2012) Paternal Age Effect on Age of Onset in Bipolar I Disorder is Mediated by Sex and Family History American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B   159B: 567-569  PMID: 22592928 *SEGREG*

==YEAR 2011==

 * Schnell AH, Sun X, Igo, RP, Elston, RC (2011) Some Capabilities for Model-Based Model-Free Linkage Analysis using the Program Package S.A.G.E. (Statistical Analysis for Genetic Epidemiology) 73:237-246 PMID: 22189466 *SIBPAL, AGEON*

 * Kurzius-Spencer M, Guerra S, Sherrill D, Halonen M, Elston, RC, Martinez F (2011) Familial aggregation of allergen-specific sensitization and asthma  Pediatr Allergy Immunol: 23(1):21-7  PMID: 22592928 *ASSOC*

 * Cubells JF, Sun X, Li W, Bonsall RW, McGrath JA, Avramopoulos D, Lasseter VK, Wolyniec PS, Tang YL, Mercer K, Pulver AE, Elston RC (2011) Linkage Analysis of Plasma Dopamine β-hydroxylase Activity in Families of Patients with Schizophrenia. Hum Genet; Epub. PMID: 21509519 *FCOR, SEGREG, LODLINK, MLOD, GENIBD, SIBPAL*

 * Song Y, Namkung J, Shields R, Baechle D, Song S, Elston RC (2011)  A method to detect single –nucleotide polymorphisms accounting for a linkage signal using covariate-based affected relative pair linkage analysis.  BMC Proc. 2011 Nov 29;5 PMID: 22373405  PMCID:  PMC3287925 *ASSOC, GENIBD, LODPAL*

 * Shetty PB, Qin H, Namkung J, Elston RC, Zhu X. (2011) Estimating heritability using family and unrelated individuals data. BMC Proc. 2011 Nov 29;5 PMCID: PMC3287870 *ASSOC*

 * Mathew G, Song Y, Elston RC (2011) Interval Estimation of Familial Correlations from Pedigrees. Stat Appl Genet MolBiol; 10(1):Article 11. PMID: 21381436 *FCOR*


==YEAR 2010==

 * Ochs-Balcom HM, Guo X, Yonebayashi T, Wiesner G, Elston RC. (2010) Program update and novel use of the DESPAIR program to design a genome-wide linkage study using relative pairs. Hum Hered. 2010;69(1):45-51. Epub 2009 Oct 2. PMID:19797908. PMCID:PMC2880734 *DESPAIR, SIBPAL*

 * Stein CM, Lu Q, Elston RC, Freebairn LA, Hansen AJ, Shriberg LD, Taylor HG, Lewis BA, Iyengar SK (2010). Heritability Estimation for Speech-Sound Traits with developmental trajectories. Behav Genet; 41(2):184-91. PMID: 20623172 *FCOR*

 * Yang R, Li L, Seidelmann SB, Shen GQ, Sharma S, Rao S, Abdullah KG, MacKinlay KG, Elston RC, Chen Q, Topol EJ, Wang QK. (2010) A Genome-Wide Linkage Scan Identifies Multiple QTLs for HDL Cholesterol Levels in Families with Premature CAD and MI. J Lipid Res.2010 Jan 14. PMID: 20075193 *FREQ, RELTEST, MARKERINFO*


==YEAR 2009== 

 * Bochud M, Staessen JA, Maillard M, Mazeko MJ, Kuznetsova T, Woodiwiss  A, Richart T, Norton G, Thijs L, Elston R, Burnier M (2009). Ethnic differences in proximal and distal tubular sodium reabsorption are heritable in Black and White populations. J Hypertension. 27(3):606-612. PMID: 19262228 *ASSOC*

 * de Carvalho FM, Tinoco EM, Govil M, Marazita ML, Vieira AR. Aggressive periodontitis is likely influenced by a few small effect genes. (2009) J Clin Periodontol. 2009 Jun;36(6):468-73. PMID:19453571. PMCID:PMC2731969 *SEGREG*

 * Feng Q, Abraham J, Feng T, Song Y, Elston RC, Zhu X. (2009) A Method to Correct for Population Structure Using a Segregation Model. BMC Proc. 2009 3(7):S104 PMID: 20017968  PMCID: PMC2795875 *SEGREG*

 * Fermino RC, Seabra A, Garganta R, Maia JA. (2009) Genetic factors in familial aggregation of blood pressure of Portuguese nuclear families. Arq Bras Cardiol. 2009 Mar;92(3):199-204, 203-9. PMID:19390708 *FCOR, ASSOC*

 * Gray-McGuire C, Bochud M, Goodloe R, Elston RC (2009) Genetic association tests: A method for the joint analysis of family and case-control data. Hum Genomics. 4(1):2-20. PMID: 19951892  PMCID: PMC2874328 *ASSOC*

 * Igo RP, Jr. and Goddard KAB (2009) Association mapping by generalized linear regression with density-based haplotype clustering. Genet.Epidemiol. 33 (1):16-26. *DECIPHER*

 * Jun G, Guo H, Klein BE, Klein R, Jin Wang J, Mitchell P, Miao H, Lee KE, Joshi T, Buck M, Chugha P, Bardenstein D, Klein A, Bailey-Wilson JE, Gong X, Spector TD, Andrew T, Hammond C, Elston RC, Iyengar SK, Wang B (2009).  EPHA2 is associated with age-related cortical cataract in mice and humans.  PLoS Genet. 5(7): e1000584. PMID: 19649315   PMCID: PMC2712078 *SIBPAL, ASSOC*

 * Malhotra A, Igo RP, Thameem F, Kao WH, Abboud HE, Adler SG, Arar NH, Bowden DW, Duggirala E, Freedman B, Goddard KA, Ipp E, Iyengar SK, FIND Group. Genome-Wide Linkage Scans for Type 2 Diabets Mellitus in Four Ethnically Diverse Populations -- Significant Evidence for Linkage on Chromosome 4q in African Americans: The Family Investigation of Nephropathy and Diabetes Research Group (FIND). Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2009 25(8): 740-747. PMID: 19795399 *SAGE (linkage analysis)*

 * Wiener HW et al (2009) Linkage analysis of schizophrenia in African-American families. Schizophr.Res. 109 (1-3):70-79. *SIBPAL*

 * Won S, Kim S, Elston RC (2009).  Phase uncertainty in case-control association studies.  Genet Epidemiol. 33(6): 463-478. PMID: 19194981  PMCID: PMC2838926 *DECIPHER*


 * Xu H, Mathew G, George V. (2009) Family-based genome-wide association study for simulated data of Framingham Heart Study. BMC Proc. 2009 Dec 15;3 Suppl 7:S124. PMID:20017990. PMCID:PMC2795897 *ASSOC*


==YEAR 2008== 

 * Arar NH et al (2008) Heritability of the severity of diabetic retinopathy: the FIND-Eye study. Invest Ophthalmol.Vis.Sci. 49 (9):3839-3845. PMID: 18765632  PMCID: PMC2583147 *FCOR*

 * Aukes MF et al (2008) Finding suitable phenotypes for genetic studies of schizophrenia: heritability and segregation analysis. Biol Psychiatry 64 (2):128-136. *FCOR*

 * Bochud M, Eap CB, Maillard M, Johnson T, Vollenweider P, Bovet P, Elston RC, Bergmann S, Beckmann JS, Waterworth D, Mooser V, Gabriel A, Burner M (2008). Association of ABCB1 genetic variants with renal function in Africans and in Caucasians.  BMC Medical Genomics. 1:21.  PMID: 18518969  PMCID: PMC2424071 *ASSOC*

 * Bochud PY et al (2008) Toll-like receptor 4 polymorphisms and aspergillosis in stem-cell transplantation. N Engl J Med 359 (17):1766-1777. *DECIPHER*

 * Bogaert V et al (2008) Heritability of blood concentrations of sex-steroids in relation to body composition in young adult male siblings. Clin Endocrinol.(Oxf) 69 (1):129-135. *FCOR*

 * Daley D, Lewis S, Platzer P, MacMillen M, Willis J, Elston RC, Markowitz SD, Wiesner GL (2008). Identification of susceptibility genes for cancer in a genome-wide scan: results from the colon neoplasia sibling study.  Am J Hum Genet. 82(3):  723-736. PMID: 18313025  PMCID: PMC2427227 *RELTEST, MARKERINFO, GENIBD, SIBPAL*

 * Feng R and Zhang H (2008) A genomic imprinting test for ordinal traits in pedigree data. Genet.Epidemiol. 32 (2):132-142. *LODPAL*

 * He SM, Du WD, Yang S, Zhou SM, Li W, Wang J, Xiao FL, Xu SX, Zhang XJ. (2008) The genetic epidemiology of tinea versicolor in China. Mycoses. 2008 Jan;51(1):55-62. PMID:18076596 *REGTL*

 * Herrera-Galeano JE et al (2008) A novel variant in the platelet endothelial aggregation receptor-1 gene is associated with increased platelet aggregability. Arterioscler.Thromb.Vasc.Biol 28 (8):1484-1490. *ASSOC*

 * Hietala K et al (2008) Heritability of proliferative diabetic retinopathy. Diabetes 57 (8):2176-2180. *FCOR*

 * Larkin EK, Patel SR, Elston RC, Gray-McGuire C, Zhu X, Redline S. (2008) Using linkage analysis to identify quantitative trait loci for sleep apnea in relationship to body mass index. Ann Hum Genet 72 (Pt 6):762-773. PMID: 18754839  PMCID: PMC2677984 *GENIBD, FREQ*

 * Li MD, Lou XY, Chen G, Ma JZ, Elston RC. (2008)  Gene-gene interactions among CHRNA4, CHRNB2, BDNF, and NTRK2 in nicotine dependence.  Biol Psychiatry. 64(11):951-957.  PMID: 18534558  PMCID: PMC2592606 *FREQ*

 * Li MD, Ma JZ, Payne TJ, Lou XY, Zhang D, Dupont RT, Elston RC. (2008) Genome-wide linkage scan for nicotine dependence in European Americans and its converging results with African Americans in the Mid-South Tobacco Family sample. Mol Psychiatry. 2008 Apr;13(4):407-16. PMID:17579606 *SIBPAL, GENIBD*

 * Lewinsohn DA et al (2008) Whole blood interferon-gamma responses to mycobacterium tuberculosis antigens in young household contacts of persons with tuberculosis in Uganda. PLoS ONE 3 (10):e3407. *SAGE* 

 * Ochs-Balcom HM, Cicek MS, Thompson CL, Tucker TC, Elston RC, Plummer S, Casey S,  Li L. (2008) Association of vitamin D receptor gene variants, adiposity and colon cancer. Carcinogenesis 29 (9):1788-1793. PMID: 18628249  ID: PMC2722851 *SAGE (general analysis)*

 * Rommelse NN et al (2008) Neuropsychological measures probably facilitate heritability research of ADHD. Arch.Clin Neuropsychol. 23 (5):579-591. *FCOR*

 * Rommelse NN et al (2008) Speed, variability, and timing of motor output in ADHD: which measures are useful for endophenotypic research? Behav Genet. 38 (2):121-132. *SIBPAL*

 * Rommelse NN et al (2008) Support for an independent familial segregation of executive and intelligence endophenotypes in ADHD families. Psychol.Med. 1-12. *FCOR*

 * Ruchat SM et al (2008) Genome-wide linkage analysis for circulating levels of adipokines and C-reactive protein in the Quebec family study (QFS). J Hum Genet 53 (7):629-636. *SIBPAL*

 * Seabra AF et al (2008) Genetic and environmental factors in familial clustering in physical activity. Eur J Epidemiol 23 (3):205-211. *FCOR, ASSOC*

 * Seidlerova J, Bochud M, Staesse JA et al, on behalf of the EPOGH Investigators. (2008) Heritability and intrafamilial aggregation of arterial characteristics. J.Hypertens. 26 (4):721-728. PMID: 18327082 *ASSOC*
 * Schelling JR, Abboud HE, Nicholas SB, Pahl MV, Sedor JR, Adler SG, Arar NH, Bowden DW, Elston RC, et al. (2008)  Genomome-Wide Scan for Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate in Multi-Ethnic Diabetic Populations: The Family Investigation of Nephropathy and Diabetes (FIND).  Diabetes. 57(1): 235-243.  PMID: 18003762 *ASSOC, FREQ, RELTEST, GENIBD, SIBPAL*

 * Stein CM, Zalwango S, Malone L L, Won S, Mayanja-Kizza H, Mugerwa RD, Leontiev DV, Thompson CL, Cartier KC, Elston RC, Iyengar SK, Boom WH, Whalen CC. (2008)  Genome scan of M. tuberculosis infection and disease in Ugandans. PLoS One. 3(12): 4094.  PMID: 19116662  PMCID: PMC2605555 *RELTEST, RELPAIR, FREQ, GENIBD, SIBPAL, MLOD, MARKERINFO, LODLINK*

 * Timmann C et al (2008) Human genetic resistance to Onchocerca volvulus: evidence for linkage to chromosome 2p from an autosome-wide scan. J Infect.Dis. 198 (3):427-433. *SIBPAL*

 * Wong J, Nock NL, Xu Z, Kyle C, Daniels A, White M, Yue DK, Elston RC, Mountjoy KG (2008). A polymorphism (D20S32e) close to the human melanocortin receptor 3 is associated with insulin resistance but not the metabolic syndrome.  Diabetes Res Clin Prac. 80(2):203-207. PMID: 18180070 *ASSOC, FREQ*

 * Zhu X, Shengchao L, Cooper R, Elston RC. (2008) A unified association analysis approach for family and unrelated samples correcting for stratification.  Am J Hum Genet. 82: 352-365.   PMID: 18252216  PMCID: PMC2427300 *ASSOC*


==YEAR 2007==

 * Eap CB, Bochud M, Elston RC, Bovet P, Maillard MP, Nussberger J, Schild L,Shamlaye C, Burnier M. (2007)  CYP3A5 ad ABCB1 genes influence blood pressure and response to treatment, and their effect is modified by salt. Hypertension. 49: 1007-1014.  PMID: 17372036 *ASSOC*

 * Iyengar SK, Abboud H, Goddard K, Saad M, Adler S, Arar N, Bowden D, Duggirala R, Elston RC, et al, FIND Group. (2007)  Genome-wide scans for diabetic nephropathy and albuminuria in multi-ethnic populations:  The Family Investigation of Nephropathy and Diabetes (FIND). Diabetes. 56(6): 1577-1585.  PMID: 17363742 *MARKERINFO, RELTEST, FREQ, GENIBD, SIBPAL*

 * Kovac IP, Havlik RJ, Foley D, Peila R, Hernandez D, Wavrant-De Vrièze F, Singleton A, Egan J, Taub D, Rodriguez B, Masaki K, Curb JD, Fujimoto WY, Wilson AF. (2007) Linkage and association analyses of type 2 diabetes/impaired glucose metabolism and adiponectin serum levels in Japanese Americans from Hawaii. Diabetes. 2007 Feb;56(2):537-40. PMID:17259404. PMCID:PMC2435496 *SIBPAL, ASSOC*

 * Lan TH et al (2007) Parent-of-origin effect in the segregation analysis of bipolar affective disorder families. Psychiatr Genet 17 (2):93-101. *REGD*

 * Matthews AG et al (2007) The role of the GABRA2 polymorphism in multiplex alcohol dependence families with minimal comorbidity: within-family association and linkage analyses. J Stud.Alcohol Drugs 68 (5):625-633. *SIBPAL*

 * Ochs-Balcom H, Falk G, Grady W, Kinnard M, Willis J, Elston RC, Eng C (2007).Consortium approach to identifying genes for Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma.  Transl Res. 150(1): 3-17.  PMID: 17585859 *SAGE (linkage and association approaches to segregated traits)*

 * Rybicki BA, Sinha R, Iyengar SK, Gray-McGuire C, Elston RC, Iannuzzi MC, SAGA Study Consortium. (2007)  Genetic linkage analysis of sarcoidosis phenotypes: The Sarcoidosis Genetic Analysis (SAGA) Study.  Genes Immunity. 8: 379-386.  PMID: 17476268 *LODPAL*

 * Schaid DJ, Sinnwell JP, and Thibodeau SN (2007) Testing genetic linkage with relative pairs and covariates by quasi-likelihood score statistics. Hum Hered 64 (4):220-233. *LODPAL*

 * Shen, GQ, Li L, Girelli D, Seidelmann SB, Rao S, Fan C, Park JAE, Xi Q,  Li J, Hu Y, Olivieri O, Marchant K, Barnard J, Corrocher R, Elston RC, Cassano J, Henderson S, Hazen SL, Plow EF, Topol EJ, Wang QK (2007).  An LRP8 variant is associated with familial and premature coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction.  Am J Hum Genet. 81: 780-791.  PMID: 17847002 *SAGE (IBD sharing computations, compared to other software)*

 * Stein CM, Zalwango S, Chiumda AB, Millard C, Leontiev DV, Horvath AL, Chervenak K, Boom WH, Elston RC, Mugerwa RD, Whalen CC, Iyengar SK. (2007)  Linkage and association analysis of candidate genes for TB and TNFα cytokine expression: Evidence for assocation with IFNGR1, IL-10, and TNF receptor 1 genes.  Hum Genet. 121(6):663-73.  PMID: 17431682 *MARKERINFO, FREQ, GENIBD, ASSOC, DECIPHER, LODPAL*

 * Shete S, Elston RC, Lu Y. (2007)  A novel approach to detect parent-of-origin effects from pedigree data with application to Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome.  Ann Hum Genet. 71:804-814.  PMID: 17578507 *SEGREG*

 * Thompson CL, Klein B, Klein R, Xu Z, Capriotti J, Joshi T, Leontiev D, Lee KE, Elston RC, Iyengar SK. (2007)  Complement factor H and hemicentin-1 in age-related macular degeneration and renal phenotypes.  Hum Mol Genet. 16(17): 2135-48.PMID: 17591627 *ASSOC, DECIPHER*

 * Wang T, Elston RC. (2007) Regression-Based Linkage Analysis Methods. Current Topics in Human Genetics, Studies in Complex Diseases. Ch1, p1-19. Deng HW, Shen H, Liu YL, Hu H. Mainland Press Pte Ltd (Singapore) *LODPAL*

 * Wang T, Elston RC. (2007) Regression-based multivariate linkage analysis with an application to blood pressure and body mass index.  Ann Hum Genet. 71: 96-106.  PMID: 17227480 *SIBPAL, GENIBD, SIBPAL*

 * Xing C, Torres-Caban M, Wang T, Xing G, Elston RC. (2007)  Linkage studies of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) and dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (DBH) cDNA expression levels.  BMC Genet. 1: S95.  PMID: 18466599 *SIBPAL, GENIBD*

 * Xing G, Xing C, Lu Q, Elston RC. (2007)  A logistic mixture model for a family-based association study.  BMC Genet. 1: S44.  PMID: 18466543 *SEGREG, ASSOC*

 * Yang Q, Biernacka JM, Chen MH, Houwing-Duistermaat JJ, Bergemann TL, Basu S, Fan R, Liu L, Bourgey M, Clerget-Darpoux F, Lin WY, Elston RC, Cupples LA, Apprey V, Cui J, Dupuis J, Ionita-Laza I, Li R, Lou X, Perdry H, Sherva R, ShugartYY, Suarez B, Wang H, Wormald H, Xing G, Xing C. (2007)  Using linkage and association to identify and model genetic effects: summary of GAW15 Group 4.  Genet Epidemiol. 31 S1:S34-42.  PMID: 18046758 *SEGREG, ASSOC*

 * Lou XY, Ma JZ, Yang MCK, Zhu J, Liu PY, Deng HW, Elston RC, Li MD. (2006) Improvement of mapping accuracy by unifying linkage and association analysis.  Genetics. 172(1): 647-661.  PMID: 16172505 *FREQ, GENIBD, SIBPAL, ASSOC*

 * Zandi PP, Badner JA, Steele J, Willour VL, Miao K, MacKinnon DF, Mondimore FM, Schweizer B, McInnis MG, DePaulo JR Jr, Gershon E, McMahon FJ, Potash JB. (2007) Genome-wide linkage scan of 98 bipolar pedigrees and analysis of clinical covariates. Mol Psychiatry. 2007 Jul;12(7):630-9. PMID:17505464 *LODPAL*


==YEAR 2006==

 * Aben KK et al (2006) Segregation analysis of urothelial cell carcinoma. Eur J Cancer 42 (10):1428-1433. *SAGE (segregation package)*

 * Bochud M, Eap CB, Elston RC, Bovet P, Maillard M, Schild L, Shamlaye C, Burnier M,  (2006).  Association of CYP3A5 genotypes with blood pressure and renal function in African families.  J Hyperten. 24: 923-929.  PMID: 16612255 *ASSOC*

 * Bochud M, Nussberger J, Bovet P, Maillard M, Elston RC, Paccaud F, Shamlaye C, Burnier M. (2006) Plasma aldosterone is independently associated with the metabolic syndrome. Hypertension. 48(2): 239-245.   PMID: 16785327 *ASSOC*

 * Bukulmez H, Matthews AL, Sullivan CM, Chen C, Kraay MJ, Elston RC, Moskowitz RW, Goldberg VM, Warman ML. (2006)  Hip joint replacement surgery for idiopathic osteoarthritis aggregates in families.  Arthritis Res Therapy. 8:R25.  PMID: 16507126 *SEGREG*

 * Doan BQ, Sorant AJ, Frangakis CE, Bailey-Wilson JE, Shugart YY. (2006) Covariate-based linkage analysis: application of a propensity score as the single covariate consistently improves power to detect linkage. Eur J Hum Genet. 2006 Sep;14(9):1018-26. PMID:16736037 *LODPAL*

 * Elston RC, Spence MA. (2006) Advances in statistical human genetics over the last 25 years.  Stat Med. 25(18): 3049-3080.  PMID: 16900576 *SIBPAL*

 * Gray-McGuire C., Sinha R., Iyengar S.K., Millard C., Rybicki B., Elston R.C., Iannuzzi M. (2006)  Genetic characterization and fine mapping of susceptibility genes for sarcoidosis in African Americans on chromosome 5.  Hum Genet. 120(3): 420-430. PMID: 16896925 *MARKERINFO, FREQ, GENIBD, SIBPAL, LODPAL, LODLINK*

 * Janutta V, Hamann H, and Distl O (2006) Complex segregation analysis of canine hip dysplasia in German shepherd dogs. J Hered 97 (1):13-20. *REGD*

 * Kaabi B, Gelernter J, Woods SW, Goddard A, Page GP, Elston RC. (2006)  Genome scan for loci predisposing to anxiety disorders using a novel multivariate approach: evidence for a chromosome 4 risk locus.  Am J Hum Genet. 78:  543-553.   PMID: 16532386 *MARKERINFO, RELTEST, SIBPAL, GENIBD*

 * Krischek B et al (2006) Is there any evidence for linkage on chromosome 17cen in affected Japanese sib-pairs with an intracranial aneurysm? J Hum Genet 51 (5):491-494. *SIBPAL*

 * Li MD, Payne TJ, Ma JZ, Lou XY, Zhang D, Dupont RT, Crews KM, Somes G, Williams NJ, Elston RC. (2006) A genomewide search finds major susceptibility loci for nicotine dependence on chromosome 10 in African Americans. Am J Hum Genet 79 (4):745-751. PMID: 16960812 *GENIBD, SIBPAL*

 * Mukhopadhyay I, Feingold E, Wang T, Elston RC, Weeks DE. (2006) Treatment of uninformative families in mean allele sharing tests for linkage. Stat.Appl.Genet.Mol.Biol. 5:Article13. PMID: 17049024 *SIBPAL*

 * Murabito JM et al (2006) Heritability of the ankle-brachial index: the Framingham Offspring study. Am J Epidemiol 164 (10):963-968. *FCOR*

 * Rao S, Wang QK. (2006) SAGE programs: model-free linkage analysis for complex cardiovascular phenotypes. (book chapter) Methods Mol Med. 2006;128:61-89. PMID:17071990 *SAGE (linkage analysis, in particular the Haseman-Elston sib-pair regression method)*

 * Sinha M, Song Y, Elston RC, Olson JM, Goddard KAB. (2006) Prediction of empirical p-values from asymptotic p-values for conditional logistic affected relative pair linkage analysis.  Human Hered. 61: 45-54.  PMID: 16612102 *LODPAL*

 * Sun X, Xu A, Wei X, Ouyang J, Lu L, Chen M, Zhang D. (2006) Genetic epidemiology of vitiligo: a study of 815 probands and their families from south China. Int J Dermatol. 2006 Oct;45(10):1176-81. PMID:17040433 *REGTL*

 * Thompson C, Rybicki B, Iannuzzi MC, Elston RC, Iyengar SK, Gray-McGuire C. (2006)  Reduction of sample heterogeneity using population substructure: An example from a population of African-American sarcoidosis families.  Am J Hum Genet. 79:606-613.  PMID: 16960797 *GENIBD, SIBPAL*

 * Tsai HJ, Weeks DE. (2006) Comparison of methods incorporating quantitative covariates into affected sib pair linkage analysis. Genet Epidemiol. 2006 Jan;30(1):77-93. PMID:16355406 *LODPAL*

 * Wang T, Elston RC. (2006) A quantitative linkage score for an association study following a linkage analysis.  BMC Genetics. 7:5.  PMID: 16426440 *SIBPAL, GENIBD*

 * Won S, Elston RC, Park T. (2006) Extension of the Haseman-Elston regression model to longitudinal data.  Hum Hered. 61:111-119.  PMID: 16733364 *SIBPAL*

 * Xing C, Elston RC. (2006) Distribution and magnitude of Type I error of the model- based multipoint lod score: Implications for multipoint mod score.  Genet Epidemiol. 30:447-458. PMID: 16685712 *MLOD, LODLINK*

 * Xing C, Sinha R, Xing G, Lu Q, Elston RC. (2006)  The affected-sib-pair/discordant-sib-pair design can guarantee validity of multipoint model-free linkage analysis of incomplete pedigrees when there is marker-marker disequilibrium.  Am J Hum Genet. 79(2): 396-401.  PMID: 16826532 *LODPAL*


==YEAR 2005 and before==

 * Doan BQ, Frangakis CE, Shugart YY, Bailey-Wilson JE. (2005) Application of the propensity score in a covariate-based linkage analysis of the Collaborative Study on the Genetics of Alcoholism.  BMC Genet. 2005 Dec 30;6 Suppl 1:S33. PMID:16451643. PMCID: PMC1866752 *LODPAL*

 * Bochud M, Elston RC, Maillard M, Bovet P, Schild L, Shamlaye C, Burnier M. Heritability of renal function in hypertensive families of African descent in the Seychelles (Indian Ocean). Kidney Int. 2005 Jan;67(1):61-9. PMID:15610228 *ASSOC*

 * Hanna GL et al (2005) Complex segregation analysis of obsessive-compulsive disorder in families with pediatric probands. Hum Hered 60 (1):1-9. *REGTL*

 * Krivanek AF, Famula TR, Tenscher A, Walker MA. (2005) Inheritance of resistance to Xylella fastidiosa within a Vitis rupestris x Vitis arizonica hybrid population. Theor Appl Genet. 2005 Jun;111(1):110-9. Epub 2005 Apr 28. PMID:15864525 *SAGE (complex segregation analysis SEGREG?, plus used to fit all the necessary models)*

 * Lin PI, McInnis MG, Potash JB, Willour VL, Mackinnon DF, Miao K, Depaulo JR, Zandi PP. (2005) Assessment of the effect of age at onset on linkage to bipolar disorder: evidence on chromosomes 18p and 21q. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Oct;77(4):545-55. PMID:16175501. PMCID:PMC1275604 *LODPAL*

 * Mukhopadhyay N et al (2005) Mega2: data-handling for facilitating genetic linkage and association analyses. Bioinformatics 21 (10):2556-2557. *SAGE (in a listing / honorable mention)*

 * Sun XK, Xu AE, Meng W, Wei XD, Jiang ZM, Yan XF, Ou YJ, Lu LJ, Chen MH, Zhang DM. (2005) [Study on genetic epidemiology on 815 patients with vitiligo in Zhejiang area.] (in Chinese) Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Nov;26(11):911-4. PMID:16676617 *REGTL*

 * Yamaguchi T et al (2005) Genome-wide linkage analysis of mandibular prognathism in Korean and Japanese patients. J Dent.Res 84 (3):255-259. *SIBPAL*

 * Yang W et al (2005) Linkage and linkage disequilibrium analysis of the lipoprotein lipase gene with lipid profiles in Chinese hypertensive families. Clin Sci.(Lond) 108 (2):137-142. *SIBPAL*

 * Yang XR et al (2005) Linkage analysis of the GAW14 simulated dataset with microsatellite and single-nucleotide polymorphism markers in large pedigrees. BMC.Genet 6 Suppl 1:S14. *SIBPAL*

 * Yu ZQ et al (2005) [Pedigree study of pathological myopia]. Yi.Chuan Xue.Bao. 32 (2):130-135. *REGD*



 * Arcos-Burgos M, Castellanos FX, Pineda D, Lopera F, Palacio JD, Palacio LG, Rapoport JL, Berg K, Bailey-Wilson JE, Muenke M. (2004) Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in a population isolate: linkage to loci at 4q13.2, 5q33.3, 11q22, and 17p11. Am J Hum Genet. 2004 Dec;75(6):998-1014. PMID:15497111; PMCID:PMC1182160 *LODPAL*

 * Chen S et al (2004) Genomewide linkage scan identifies a novel susceptibility locus for restless legs syndrome on chromosome 9p. Am J Hum Genet 74 (5):876-885. *FCOR*

 * Elston RC and Gray-McGuire C (2004) A review of the 'Statistical Analysis for Genetic Epidemiology' (S.A.G.E.) software package. Hum Genomics 1 (6):456-459. *S.A.G.E. (as a whole for package review)*

 * Gu F, Ge D, Huang J, Chen J, Yang W, Gu D. (2004) Genetic susceptibility loci for essential hypertension and blood pressure on chromosome 17 in 147 Chinese pedigrees. J Hypertens. 2004 Aug;22(8):1511-8. PMID:15257173 *SIBPAL, GENIBD*

 * Kurzius-Spencer M et al (2004) Segregation analysis of bronchial hyperresponsiveness in a general population in north Italy. Am J Med Genet A 125 (3):232-239. *FCOR, REGC*

 * Lee KE et al (2004) Familial aggregation of retinal vessel caliber in the beaver dam eye study. Invest Ophthalmol.Vis.Sci. 45 (11):3929-3933. *FCOR*

 * Matsui H et al (2004) Genomewide linkage analysis of familial prostate cancer in the Japanese population. J Hum Genet 49 (1):9-15. *SIBPAL*

 * Yang S, Yang J, Liu JB, Wang HY, Yang Q, Gao M, Liang YH, Lin GS, Lin D, Hu XL, Fan L, Zhang XJ. The genetic epidemiology of alopecia areata in China. Br J Dermatol. 2004 Jul;151(1):16-23. PMID:15270868 *REGTL*



 * Boyadjiev SA et al (2003) A novel dysmorphic syndrome with open calvarial sutures and sutural cataracts maps to chromosome 14q13-q21. Hum Genet 113 (1):1-9. *SIBPAL*

 * Cai RL et al (2003) Segregation analysis of hepatocellular carcinoma in a moderately high-incidence area of East China. World J Gastroenterol. 9 (11):2428-2432. *REGTL*

 * Gass JR et al (2003) Familial correlations and heritability of maxillary midline diastema. Am J Orthod.Dentofacial Orthop. 123 (1):35-39. *REGC*

 * Hsu FC, Hetmanski JB, Li L, Markakis D, Jacobs K, Shugart YY. (2003) Comparison of significance level at the true location using two linkage approaches: LODPAL and GENEFINDER. BMC Genet. 2003 Dec 31;4 Suppl 1:S46. PMID:14975114; PMCID:PMC1866482 *LODPAL*

 * Iyengar SK et al (2003) Linkage analysis of candidate loci for end-stage renal disease due to diabetic nephropathy. J Am Soc Nephrol. 14 (7 Suppl 2):S195-S201. *SIBPAL*

 * Jacobs KB et al (2003) Genome-wide linkage scan for genes affecting longitudinal trends in systolic blood pressure. BMC.Genet. 4 Suppl 1:S82. *SIBPAL*

 * Jawaheer D et al (2003) Screening the genome for rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility genes: a replication study and combined analysis of 512 multicase families. Arthritis Rheum 48 (4):906-916. *SIBPAL*

 * Lakka TA et al (2003) A quantitative trait locus on 7q31 for the changes in plasma insulin in response to exercise training: the HERITAGE Family Study. Diabetes 52 (6):1583-1587. *SIBPAL*

 * Lee KE, Klein BE, and Klein R (2003) Familial aggregation of components of the multiple metabolic syndrome in the Framingham Heart and Offspring Cohorts: Genetic Analysis Workshop Problem 1. BMC.Genet 4 Suppl 1:S94. *FCOR*

 * Li MD et al (2003) A genome-wide scan to identify loci for smoking rate in the Framingham Heart Study population. BMC.Genet 4 Suppl 1:S103. *SIBPAL*

 * Ma JZ et al (2003) Mapping susceptibility loci for alcohol consumption using number of grams of alcohol consumed per day as a phenotype measure. BMC.Genet 4 Suppl 1:S104. *SIBPAL*

 * Wang JS et al (2003) [Studies on genetic model in familial type 2 diabetes mellitus]. Yi.Chuan 25 (6):637-640. *REGD*

 * Wu CO et al (2003) A statistical method for adjusting covariates in linkage analysis with sib pairs. BMC.Genet 4 Suppl 1:S51. *LODPAL*



 * al-Bustan SA et al (2002) Epidemiological and genetic study of 121 cases of oral clefts in Kuwait. Orthod.Craniofac.Res 5 (3):154-160. *REGD*

 * Furushima K et al (2002) Large-scale screening for candidate genes of ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. J Bone Miner.Res 17 (1):128-137. *SIBPAL*

 * Hill EM et al (2002) Antisocial alcoholism and serotonin-related polymorphisms: association tests. Psychiatr.Genet 12 (3):143-153. *ASSOC*

 * Maher BS et al (2002) Genetic segregation analysis of alcohol and other substance-use disorders in families with recurrent, early-onset major depression. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 28 (4):711-731. *REGD*

 * Maher BS et al (2002) Genetic segregation analysis of recurrent, early-onset major depression: evidence for single major locus transmission. Am J Med Genet 114 (2):214-221. *REGD*

 * Tsao BP, Cantor RM, Grossman JM, Kim SK, Strong N, Lau CS, Chen CJ, Shen N, Ginzler EM, Goldstein R, Kalunian KC, Arnett FC, Wallace DJ, Hahn BH. (2002) Linkage and interaction of loci on 1q23 and 16q12 may contribute to susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum. 2002 Nov;46(11):2928-36. PMID:12428234 *SIBPAL*

 * Zhang X, Wang H, Chen S, Wang F, Liu T, Wang Z, Li M, Yang S. (2002) [Analyses of genetic model of psoriasis vulgaris]. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Apr;19(2):108-11. Chinese. PMID: 11941583 *REGTL*

 * Zhang X, Wang H, Te-Shao H, Yang S, Chen S. (2002) The genetic epidemiology of psoriasis vulgaris in Chinese Han. Int J Dermatol. 2002 Oct;41(10):663-9. PMID:12390189 *REGTL*



 * Chen Y et al (2001) Segregation analyses of asthma and respiratory allergy: the Humboldt family study. Am J Med Genet 104 (1):23-30. *REGD*

 * Forrest WF (2001) Weighting improves the "new Haseman-Elston" method. Hum Hered 52 (1):47-54. *SIBPAL*

 * Jawaheer D et al (2001) A genomewide screen in multiplex rheumatoid arthritis families suggests genetic overlap with other autoimmune diseases. Am J Hum Genet 68 (4):927-936. *SIBPAL*

 * Ni P, Shen F, Meng W, Jiang F, Feng S. (2001) [Complex segregation analysis of systemic lupus erythematosus]. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2001 Oct;18(5):343-6. Chinese. PMID:11592039 *REGTL*

 * Pausova Z et al (2001) Heritability estimates of obesity measures in siblings with and without hypertension. Hypertension 38 (1):41-47. *FCOR*

 * Perusse L et al (2001) A genome-wide scan for abdominal fat assessed by computed tomography in the Quebec Family Study. Diabetes 50 (3):614-621. *SIBPAL*

 * Silverman EK, Mosley JD, Rao DC, Palmer LJ, Province MA, Elston RC, Weiss ST, Campbell EJ. (2001) Linkage analysis of alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency: lessons for complex diseases. Hum Hered. 2001;52(4):223-32. PMID:11713419 *RELPAL*

 * Sobel E, Sengul H, Weeks DE. (2001) Multipoint estimation of identity-by-descent probabilities at arbitrary positions among marker loci on general pedigrees. Hum Hered. 2001;52(3):121-31. PMID:11588394 *SAGE (as a whole comparison)*

 * Young TL et al (2001) Further refinement of the MYP2 locus for autosomal dominant high myopia by linkage disequilibrium analysis. Ophthalmic Genet 22 (2):69-75. *TDTEX*



 * Bouchard C et al (2000) Genomic scan for maximal oxygen uptake and its response to training in the HERITAGE Family Study. J Appl Physiol 88 (2):551-559. *SIBPAL*

 * Chagnon YC et al (2000) Genome-wide search for genes related to the fat-free body mass in the Quebec family study. Metabolism 49 (2):203-207. *SIBPAL*

 * Chu R et al (2000) Genetic epidemiology study of pathological myopia. Zhonghua Yi.Xue.Yi.Chuan Xue.Za Zhi. 17 (3):178-180. *REGD*

 * Hong Y et al (2000) No evidence of linkage between the very-low-density lipoprotein receptor gene and fasting serum insulin or homeostasis model assessment insulin resistance index: the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Family Heart Study. Metabolism 49 (3):293-297. *SIBPAL*

 * Imperatore G et al (2000) Segregation analysis of diabetic nephropathy in Pima Indians. Diabetes 49 (6):1049-1056. *REGD, REGTL*

 * Seuchter SA et al (2000) Complex segregation analysis of families ascertained through Gilles de la Tourette syndrome. Genet Epidemiol 18 (1):33-47. *REGTLhunt*

 * Wang TN et al (2000) Segregation analysis of asthma: recessive major gene component for asthma in relation to history of atopic diseases. Am J Med Genet 93 (5):373-380. *REGD*

 * Zhang W et al (2000) Segregation analysis of esophageal cancer in a moderately high-incidence area of northern China. Am J Hum Genet 67 (1):110-119. *REGTL*



 * Arinami T et al (1999) Supportive evidence for contribution of the dopamine D2 receptor gene to heritability of stature: linkage and association studies. Ann Hum Genet 63 (Pt 2):147-151. *SIBPAL*

 * Bali D et al (1999) Genetic analysis of multiplex rheumatoid arthritis families. Genes Immun. 1 (1):28-36. *SIBPAL*

 * Cantor RM and Lanning CD (1999) Comparison of evidence supporting a chromosome 6 alcoholism gene. Genet Epidemiol  17 Suppl 1:S91-S96. *SIBPAL*

 * Fann CS et al (1999) The impact of redefining affection status for alcoholism on affected-sib-pair analysis. Genet Epidemiol 17 Suppl 1:S151-S156. *SIBPAL*

 * Hill SY et al (1999) Linkage studies of D2 and D4 receptor genes and alcoholism. Am J Med Genet 88 (6):676-685. *SIBPAL*

 * Izumo T et al (1999) Effects of certain cerebral circulation activating drugs on regional cerebral blood flow in rats. Methods Find.Exp Clin Pharmacol. 21 (4):279-283. *FCOR*

 * King TM, Barnholtz J, and Page GP (1999) Familial analysis of event related potentials. Genet Epidemiol 17 Suppl 1:S199-S204. *SAGE-segregation analysis*

 * Monks SA et al (1999) Two tests of association for a susceptibility locus for families of variable size: an example using two sampling strategies. Genet Epidemiol 17 Suppl 1:S655-S660. *SIBPAL*

 * Niu T et al (1999) Linkage analysis of candidate genes and gene-gene interactions in chinese hypertensive sib pairs. Hypertension 33 (6):1332-1337. *SIBPAL*

 * Olson JM (1999) Relationship estimation by Markov-process models in a sib-pair linkage study. Am J Hum Genet 64 (5):1464-1472. *RELTEST*

 * Orlov SN et al (1999) Sibling resemblance of erythrocyte ion transporters in French-Canadian sibling-pairs affected with essential hypertension. J Hypertens 17 (12 Pt 2):1859-1865. *FCOR*

 * Saccone NL et al (1999) Genome screen for platelet monoamine oxidase (MAO) activity. Am J Med Genet 88 (5):517-521. *SIBPAL*

 * Wang HM, Jones MP, and Burns TL (1999) Regression diagnostics for the class A regressive model with quantitative phenotypes. Genet Epidemiol 17 (3):174-187. *REGC*

 * Yang H et al (1999) Additional evidence of linkage between Crohn's disease and a putative locus on chromosome 12. Genet Med 1 (5):194-198. *SIBPAL*



 * Aitken JF et al (1998) Segregation analysis of cutaneous melanoma in Queensland. Genet Epidemiol 15 (4):391-401. *REGTL*

 * Chen Y et al (1998) Evidence for major genetic control of wheeze in relation to history of respiratory allergy: Humboldt family study. Am J Med Genet 75 (5):485-491. *REGD*

 * Ginns EI et al (1998) A genome-wide search for chromosomal loci linked to mental health wellness in relatives at high risk for bipolar affective disorder among the Old Order Amish. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A 95 (26):15531-15536. *SIBPAL*

 * Niu T et al (1998) Angiotensinogen gene and hypertension in Chinese. J Clin Invest 101 (1):188-194. *SIBPAL*

 * Sellers TA et al (1998) Environmental factors can confound identification of a major gene effect: results from a segregation analysis of a simulated population of lung cancer families. Genet Epidemiol 15 (3):251-262. *REGTL*

 * Yu H et al (1998) Identification of human plasma kallikrein gene polymorphisms and evaluation of their role in end-stage renal disease. Hypertension 31 (4):906-911. *SIBPAL*



 * Collins JS and Go RC (1997) Disease classification and transmission effects on linkage analyses in the NIMH1 bipolar disorder pedigrees. Genet Epidemiol 14 (6):587-592. *SIBPAL*
 * Davis S and Weeks DE (1997) Comparison of nonparametric statistics for detection of linkage in nuclear families: single-marker evaluation. Am J Hum Genet 61 (6):1431-1444. *SIBPAL*

 * DeStefano AL et al (1997) Detecting linkage for a complex disease using simulated extended pedigrees. Genet Epidemiol 14 (6):981-986. *SIBPAL*

 * Edenberg HJ et al (1997) Initial genomic scan of the NIMH genetics initiative bipolar pedigrees: chromosomes 3, 5, 15, 16, 17, and 22. Am J Med Genet 74 (3):238-246. *SIBPAL*

 * Gordon D et al (1997) Association of posterior p-values of S.A.G.E. SIBPAL proportion-IBD and Haseman-Elston statistics for ACTHR112. Genet Epidemiol 14 (6):629-634. *SIBPAL*

 * Knoblauch H et al (1997) Heritability analysis of lipids and three gene loci in twins link the macrophage scavenger receptor to HDL cholesterol concentrations. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol 17 (10):2054-2060. *SIBPAL*

 * O'Connell JR, Davis S, and Weeks DE (1997) Analysis of a complex oligogenic disease. Genet Epidemiol 14 (6):861-866. *SIBPAL*

 * Yang P et al (1997) Genetic analysis of families with nonsmoking lung cancer probands. Genet Epidemiol 14 (2):181-197. *REGD, REGTL*



 * Bredie SJ, Kiemeney LA, de Haan AF, Demacker PN, Stalenhoef AF. (1996) Inherited susceptibility determines the distribution of dense low-density lipoprotein subfraction profiles in familial combined hyperlipidemia. Am J Hum Genet. 1996 Apr;58(4):812-22. PMID:8644746; PMCID:PMC1914678 *SAGE 2.2 (class D regressive models)*

 * Lee H, Stram DO. (1006) Segregation analysis of continuous phenotypes by using higher sample moments. Am J Hum Genet. 1996 Jan;58(1):213-24. PMID:8554059. PMCID:PMC1914965 *SAGE (compare MLE and regressive models with those from GEE pkg)*

 * Nemesure B et al (1996) Analyses of reported family history of glaucoma: a preliminary investigation. The Barbados Eye Study Group. Ophthalmic Epidemiol 3 (3):135-141. *SAGE (used to test transmission models)*

 * Yuan H, Marazita ML, and Hill SY (1996) Segregation analysis of alcoholism in high density families: a replication. Am J Med Genet 67 (1):71-76. *REGD*


	
 * Chen PL et al (1995) Segregation analysis of breast cancer in a population-based sample of postmenopausal probands: The Iowa Women's Health Study. Genet Epidemiol 12 (4):401-415. *SIBPAL*

 * Hanson RL, Elston RC, Pettitt DJ, Bennett PH, Knowler WC. Segregation analysis of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in Pima Indians: evidence for a major-gene effect. Am J Hum Genet. 1995 Jul;57(1):160-70. PMID:7611284; PMCID:PMC1801224 *REGTL*

 * McDermott M et al (1995) The role of T cell receptor beta chain genes in susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 38 (1):91-95. *SIBPAL*

 * Nemesure BB, He Q, and Mendell N (1995) Integration of linkage analyses and disease association studies. Genet Epidemiol 12 (6):653-658. *REGD*

 * Spence MA, Flodman PL, Sadovnick AD, Bailey-Wilson JE, Ameli H, Remick RA. Bipolar disorder: evidence for a major locus. Am J Med Genet. 1995 Oct 9;60(5):370-6. PMID:8546148 *SAGE (complex segregation anlyses)*

